[Music]
how's your day been so far Dave's been
pretty good lots of work but exciting
stuff for everyone watching I am joined
right now by riot Blastoise Blastoise
Nathan Blau who is a you should go ahead
and introduce yourself yeah so I am a
researcher tried and I'm the gameplay
insights lead and what I do is I gather
data whether it be sentiment data from
surveys or behavioral data from like win
rates or play rates of Champions and I
use that information to help inform our
designers and our product teams I was
gonna say you I feel like you're kind of
like a I don't say rising star that's
very dramatic but like you're becoming
more and more visible as you you tweet
out stuff and you're sort of out there
talking about different things that
players care about I think yeah I think
part of that is that I'm sort of out of
time in my career and also just personal
life where I genuinely engage with like
a lot of the League of Legends content
too so I think part of that's just
because I'm playing the game a lot I
watch a lot of streamers I love to watch
the NA LCS I just like to be a part of
the conversations I also think I just
happen to have like a lot of like pretty
interesting data are pretty interesting
like sort of insight into stuff that
players want to hear yeah so actually
like there's a ton of people playing
behind us right now what is this room so
this is the PC bong which is our PC cafe
where a lot of gamers come in and play
whatever game they're interested in
oftentimes things like League overwatch
pub G etc so hopefully hopefully it's
not too loud in here over the course of
Center view but let's talk a little bit
about your background so you when did
you join Ryan I joined right and I think
2015 okay yeah I've been here for about
three years
yeah about three oh yeah it's three
years in August okay three years in
August alright and what what were you
doing before then I was a user
researcher for Sony Playstation actually
in so detail so you worked on the user
experience side that meant for the
console world which is a little
different than like the PC world yeah
and I think the biggest thing was less
those console versus PC and it was more
of the we're gonna ship a triple-a you
know sort of game get it out and the you
know riots sort of games as a service
you know we're constantly updating a
game yeah so it's very different in that
like you because you are actually
looking at data that is active and using
that to sort of inform the decisions at
the game like the updates to the game
right rather than because you you're
basically able to look at all the stuff
that players are doing in the game at
any given point in time and try to pull
like lessons and learnings from that I
am exactly yeah so a lot of a lot of
that for the for the live games like you
just have way more information when
you're doing stuff for those in triple-a
games a lot of it's just sort of
exploratory research player labs or play
testing where you bring in a bunch of
people from you know the audience you're
looking to sell the game to have them
play through it give feedback on it that
was a lot of the work I did for Sony I
think it's it's got to be interesting
cuz data people oftentimes I feel like
are like the bane of the people that are
actually creating something right
because the the data people come in you
want to be helpful and give them advice
and say like okay this is what's going
on they're on here but a lot of people
design they build things they create
things off of like gut instincts right
like they're creatives and so you're
coming in with I don't know what is it
like you come in with spreadsheets and
say like well I know you think that this
is the right thing to do but actually
all the data says otherwise like is that
is that how that works
I actually think right as a healthy
relationship with that and like me
personally and that's I mean it's kind
of buzzword but it's our whole thing
we're like oh don't be data-driven be
data informed which is and I actually a
lot of the designers even the artists at
riot are really bought into that which
is they will always consider the data
that's always something that's on the
table whatever that data is but we're
not necessarily just going to go with
what that says you know the classic
example of that could be if 60% of
people want you know a and 40% 1b it's
like oh yeah well obviously you go with
a because 60% want it well but what if
that actually what if if you went with B
the 60% might not be as happy but they'd
still you know play whatever that game B
is whereas if you go with a you lose all
the 40% right there's all sorts of you
know work that goes into that that's
beyond just the data so I still think
the gut and intuition is super
employment so the communities
interaction with data is very much like
I went to this third-party website and I
see my favorite champion has a 47% win
rate which is less than 50% my champion
is imbalanced and you need to fix it and
that's I think you know we're talking a
little bit about data and how you roll
that's probably what they expect right
what what is actually going on they're
like what what is happening with you
yeah I mean so so they they show me that
47% win rate champion and there's so
much to look into I mean so as a 40% win
rate across all elos is it the same in
bronze as it is in challenger what if
those are different what's it doing to
pro play what does it what you know
what's that win right look like for
someone who is the first time person
playing that champion versus someone on
their hundredth game you know something
like a mastery curve people usually like
malphite's an interesting champion
people who usually cap out their win
rate on Malphite at like like 6 or 7
games
whereas characters like Riven I mean
people are still slowly climbing up in
their win rates with hundreds of games
on her that's you know barring that
you're not just improving it the game in
general I think a great way to think
about this though is I can design a
champion that has a perfect 50% win rate
it's called the coin flip champion you
start the game and you flip a coin if
it's heads you win if its tail's he
lives perfectly balanced right 50% that
good though right probably not so that's
the example it's like there's so much
more that goes into win rates or into
any of those data but you have to talk
about so why riot so you were working at
Sony he lived in the Bay Area I guess
yeah okay so then moving down south to
riot like how did that whole experience
happen
maybe I assume you talk a lot we've
talked before you love Yasuo it seems
like you play this game a lot yes so I I
I guess we'd have to step back once to
college actually maybe even go even
further back to high school where I was
a closet nerd and I remember was
actually the summer of senior year right
before college started all my friends
were like out trying to like go and like
you know they're trying to go party go
talk to the girls and stuff and I wanted
to play Starcraft 2 that had dropped in
I was so into it I loved Starcraft -
there's a first game I really got
competitive with in college I actually
was in was masters ranked I played in
the collegiate star league one of the
highlights of my entire gaming career
was I cheesed I she's the out of
this Grand Master player I've got what
school I think it was like Ontario says
University Chicago versus Ontario she's
the out of him and won a game I
felt so amazing I loved competitive
gaming so what worked for PlayStation it
was great cuz I also loved Triple A
games I mean I was a big final fantasy
fan but that competitive drive was
something that I think I was missing
when I actually originally applied for
riot I got the offer by turned them down
because I was still new in the industry
and I felt like maybe Sony was a more
traditional maybe safer choice you're a
lot of people are gonna hear you say
that and they're gonna be like what the
hell like he turned down a job at riot
honestly I did because and there to be
also rather like their family issues a
while.i family up in the bay I had just
moved there from Chicago I want to be
closer to them but it was actually
around this time that bard dropped and
bard was like that was the champion that
got me into league I became like a bard
one trick wait so hang on so when you
say it got me into league how'd you
played league before and then like bark
like was it like a movie like the video
that they came out for bard like what
was it that about bard that got you into
League of Legends because it's such a
random champion um so I was actually
playing a little bit before with my bad
was like it was my colleagues as the
other research team at Sony would play
league after work and that team was
amazing they're basically the like best
mentors I could have in the industry
yeah they actually like they got me into
League of Legends Bard dropped while I
was like playing it maybe it was the
movie I don't know there was its bard
mountain that cinematic I don't know
what it was but something about that
character just like gommi I started
spamming him and this is after I've
already turned right yeah that's time
watching a lot of I'm a cutie pie I just
found him really funny I really liked
his stuff there were a couple streamers
I was watching and I think I was like it
was like pokey mane I'm a cutie pie and
there was one other and you're one of
those
yeah one that I watched yeah it was
basically top whatever smokey QT yeah
exactly right I just love like watching
their stuff on League basically hit
right up again like a year later I was
like I can't take me back and Here I am
yeah so you you make all these jokes
about Yasuo but bard was the thing I
could not think of two different
champions in bharden Yasuo so all of my
colleagues here who have been here when
I started and then know me now know of
this like horrible it's like a horrible
transition when I joined riot I was a
happy-go-lucky bard main I was a support
player used to start the games I was
right blasters and I used to start games
like hey cuz look how fun summoners like
oh GG well played and I don't really
care about rank I really just wanted to
like have fun you were for fun player I
was for a half for fun I don't know what
happened I think it was I sort of
specifically remember a little bit of it
I remember I wanted to try Azir and I
wanted to try in mid lane and I'd never
lame against a Yasuo because we weren't
in the you know season where you could
play yeah so a bot um I remember I
played his ear into Yasuo like a cold
game and I was just like how is he doing
he's going all through these minions and
dashing Lara and I was just it blew my
mind I remember there's diamond level
players sitting next to me it was it was
one of our data scientists this dude
Matt and I was like back what is that
champion how do you do all this is like
I mean that's awesome and that's what he
does
I made a smurf I started playing on it
because I wanted to as basically I'm
totally role swapping to a new role new
champion me a new account it's playing
on it and I fell in love with the AH so
even though like new players even though
I was like a gold bar player new players
would beat me on yah soaks I was so bad
in him long story short I ended up being
this like trihard like hard suck hype
lat low diamond yah so now instead of
saying good luck have fun I solo kill
people and I throw up question marks I
throw up the mastery I'm like that kind
of player okay well I think yeah that
sounds more like yeah so is doing that
to you then I think anything else like
yeah we now know how those players
become who they are
you so you join riot and and what was
that whole experience like because riot
is a very like covering it for so long I
know right it's a very different company
right like I think the people who
disagree with a lot of things that right
doesn't and maybe don't like the company
as well as the people that it loves the
company everyone would agree it's a very
different type of company so what what
was sort of the experience of joining
that like for you I think the the
biggest sort of shock to me joining riot
was like I just felt like I had a lot
more freedom to do things if that makes
sense it was basically like and at other
in other areas where I've worked you
know whether it was you know I don't
know working in labs in Chicago or
working for Playstation I felt like
there was more clear direction for what
need to be done whereas riot was a lot
more like you know you could kind of
carve your own path you could sort of
set out to do things I really love that
sort of amount of freedom where you know
if you had an idea if you had something
that you thought was the right way of
going about something the right way of
analyzing something you could always
pitch it so I really loved that and then
the other thing that I've always loved
about riot is like and some people I
think this could be a downside for for
me as a major upside like these are my
friends like we would finish work we'd
go and play some in-house games play
play League when when overwatch drop
we're all playing out me and my buddies
we're all playing overwatch together we
play pub G together that like it became
my crew of friends what is something
that you've worked on that has impacted
the player base like something that
players would know about where like you
had work that directly involved sort of
the end result of what they did I to it
and it's still like the biggest project
I worked on was runes or forge that was
one where me is like the insights lead
on that project I partnered with the
design and product teams so early I mean
we're talking well over a year before we
launched and I got to do so much for
that team that was me getting to do some
of the early research just about what
players thought of our old runes and
masteries system that was getting to
play test it with hundreds of players
here in North America
a bunch of play I think yeah the
hundreds of players over in China we got
to play test it with all of the North
American LCS teams we ran it with a
couple of the Korean teams and that was
me getting that like work really closely
with them on the product talking with
designers of hey here's what we're
seeing these play tests here's what's
going well here's what's not going well
and us being able to just rapidly
iterate and fix things in fact one of
the best experiences I had was a crew of
players that we actually had come in
every single week for like two months to
play test games on it and they got to
like see as we were iterating on it
these are just like lucky players who've
been who signed up for this yeah it
basically anyone in like the broader
like SoCal area will you know we have a
way of like reaching out to them through
email to like come and bring them in and
you know we have like different
criterion so I you know people were also
I've seen people joke about us but yeah
like we bring in bronze players because
those are good perspective snow we also
bring in diamond players because those
are great perspective snow as well and
then you know clearly we brought in
North American pro players and then you
know the Korean pros for the truly yeah
I love Li yeah exactly it's a scale it's
like okay we know that North American
handle it now the Korean I could I could
bring in like what like Korean platinum
players and that could substitute for
the North America very good very good I
see it must be interesting too because
you you obviously are interested in like
the eSports side and the eSports like
the experience for the eSports side is
so different than what's going on at
like the bronze the player level or like
the new player right like runes reforge
has to be great for somebody who's
playing League of Legends for the first
time and it has to be great for faker
yes and that must be like crazy for you
to try to tackle yeah I mean that was I
will I will say like one of the best
moments since working at riot was when
we and it was it was Reyes it's like we
ran it with his Jenner Wings and Rox
Tigers we ran it with the North American
teams it was a much earlier version but
the closest version to what we launched
was something that we ran with the
Korean pros
I remember they play tested some games
on it and the games look like they were
going really well in the oh they got to
read
through all of the changeless all that
and I remember being in a room in our
Korean office and you know they were
asking like what's the overall take on
this stuff and Mike I was waiting for
the translator like fish up and when
they were you know it came back with
like overwhelmingly positive sentiment
from the pro they're like yeah this is
like really good for the game it's gonna
it keeps it really fresh it's like it
feels better than the old system man
hearing that from like the Korean like
cuz we knew from the outset that it was
way better for the early fertile newer
players and for lower level players
hearing that from the Korean pros is
like that was one of the best moments
have you had the opposite where you just
get like really critical feedback yes
ma'am trying to think of an example of
one word I can think of like some
champion level stuff where we've had
players come in and the champion just
had some rough stuff cuz it must be like
the fascinating thing to me is there are
all these people who are like designers
who are like working on this they're
super excited about it and then you get
to be like I'll it goes in just like a
survey or it brings players in and you
get to go to them and say like everyone
hates your like like that was
fascinating right yeah I'm trying to
think of a really good one that we had
that we play tester where people were
like this is uh this is yikes
ooh on the note of runes or four it's
the first time we ran it in China it did
not go over particularly well they're
really yeah cuz we did ran several
rounds in China several rounds in North
America and the first round in China did
not go over as well but it had a lot of
promise and like that was a really fun
task because and when I said didn't go
over well is like there were just clear
things that we could work on and the
team knew about them and like I think
what's worse for me is if I came out of
any of those play tests or any of our
research and I talked to designers I
talked to the product and they're like
yeah well but our goals are still this
and we're still gonna do this I came out
of a lot of these things and the best
teams work with especially the runes or
forge team was they're like yeah that's
really good we're gonna do something
about it we ended up running it again in
China like two months later we sent
another build over had another play test
and came back way better and so that's
what feels good obviously you're gonna
have bad
intamin on stuff in progress but it's
what you do about it I love that you
Nathan you must be in some sense like
the ultimate Arbit arbiter of what is
Opie and what is underpowered right
because like that you you're basically
able to look at the data and figure out
you know like what has the highest win
rates at what LaPoint like you should be
incensed like judge jury and executioner
or on like this champion is ope versus
this one it gets even a little deeper
than that because I think that's kind of
strange as there's also like what if
players are playing a character like a
champion sub-optimally with a certain
win rate where it's like we know that
too or it's like we can see what a
champions win rate is just across
everyone across all elos all builds all
skill level and maybe it's like 51% and
maybe that champion played optimally is
only 52% where they do everything
correct that gives them the highest win
rate or is it another champion it could
be something up like 56% it could be
something really strong yeah we do have
a a sense of yeah maybe what is the
strongest or the weakest but even then
it's still super situational right
depends on are you playing in a bronze
game are you playing in a in a masters
game are you are you playing in pro with
with full voice comms in full
communication those things definitely
change it a bit too why not release more
of this data yeah I mean I I think
that'd be like really cool for us to do
in the future and we actually do share
out some of this stuff maybe it's just
not as widely known but it's there's a
an insights blog post that actually
shares out some of our data around
things like play rates or win rates but
yeah I think like in the future I'd love
to see us and in some ways we have
informed things right suggested
itembuild stuff like that or I'd love to
see us though do more especially
especially as we're looking to like
update our new player onboarding
experience I'd love to see us use some
of that data to help inform players make
sort of those decisions but the other
thing that we have to remember is there
is like you know there's different
motivations for playing league you know
there are some people who are definitely
want to just play whatever is the
strongest the meta champion to win their
games and then like I just feel like me
like I really don't care what the strong
is when right
or midlaner is like i'ma play yo I'm
gonna try and style on them I'll
probably lose most of my games but when
I make a montage out of it you don't see
the games I lost so one of the one of
the interesting things for me is you
know kind of going back to the starter
conversation there's probably a lot of
people that don't know like they think
oh I don't know if I could design a game
a champion I don't know if I could do
art but maybe they're very analytical
they don't really know that your role
exists so what what would you say to
people who are like thinking about
entering into this role or like trying
to find these types of jobs that
companies like right that are maybe
deeply satisfying but like are more you
know vague or sort of in the background
yeah so I mean as far as like what you
maybe would be studying in school I
think you want to be looking at things
like statistics computer science
psychology actually or any any sort of
any sort of course that gets you into
like experimental design
I actually think economics great a great
one to study if not else because like a
lot of like a lot of video game design
or just like how we like make decisions
analytically or a lot of that's really
strong in the econ field so then you
want to be doing stuff like that and
then it's also a lot about just like you
know thinking about how you would
applied it how you would solve a problem
or how you would even identify a problem
using data if you had to say something
about riot or sort of the experience
here to people who don't really know
about what goes on here right like they
the only thing they can really see is
like the game that comes out some of the
the messaging that you guys work on a
lot to like put it out there like what
would you say to somebody who is just
looking to learn more about what life is
like here at riot and sort of the
experience of working here um
I think I think two things number one is
I mean I just love right I think it's an
amazing place to work I live close to to
our campus here you know like longboard
into work I get a talk with like some of
the smartest people I had the chance to
either work or study with it's a really
collaborative environment people are
really passionate and driven here but I
think they'll like one thing that the
one thing that sometimes does bother me
when I see it sometimes like see players
that all like riot doesn't care about
players or you know riot this you know
like they ignore us or whatever we get
stuff wrong a lot like yeah we we we
up sometimes we do dumb but I
genuinely believe right as a company
cares about players and cares about them
and this is just you know forget like
screw screw whatever you guys have seen
from like communications or what you
guys see in the game just from the
people I interact with in your work with
on a day like daily basis I know they
care about our players and I mean like
listen the second that I don't get that
sense at riot I'm out like I
will I will leave riot as soon as I
don't feel like we are actually trying
it again will screw up at least that
we're not try when we're not trying to
deliver great things some players hey me
too that very good hey Nathan thank you
so much for sitting down with me today
it's really good to talk to you awesome
thanks Travis
you